Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
the Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Brian Lurch. He
is a theoretical ecologist and evolutionary biologist who just
received the PhD from the University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill. And today we're going to talk about
topics like same sex uh same-sex sexual behavior, indiscriminate
sexual behavior, attachment, and divorce. So, Brian, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thank you for having me. I'm excited to
be here.
So what is same sex sexual behavior? What does
it include?
Yeah, I would say that same-sex sexual behavior is
any um attempted apparent sexual behavior between two members
of the same sex. Uh, SO, kind of classic
examples of this would be, uh, attempted courtship between
two members of the same sex or attempted copulation
between two members of the same sex. Um, IT
is somewhat hard to define. Uh, BECAUSE, you know,
what do we mean by sexual can be a
bit of a gray area. This is especially true
because a lot of, uh, or at least some
examples of same-sex sexual behavior appear to be sexual
behaviors that are co-opted for a different function, so.
Uh, WHAT I mean by that is, examples, uh,
like we see in some mammals, bison, some primates,
where it appears that same-sex mountings are actually a
dominance display. So it, it, it's a bit of
a gray area to what extent that sexual behavior.
Um, OTHER examples are like from Bonobos a really
classic example where sexual behaviors appear to be used
as, as a means of conflict resolution. Uh, SO
again, a, a bit of a gray area, um.
You know, I, I guess, uh, outside of, of
the idea of same-sex copulation or same-sex mountings, there's
other things like same-sex pair bonds that are sometimes
included. Uh, YOU see this a lot in birds.
Again, I think it's a bit of a gray
area what what we mean by sexual, but that's
broadly, uh, the types of things that people are
talking about when, when discussing same-sex sexual behavior.
Uh, BUT it isn't the same as homosexuality or
is it?
No, I would say it is not. So I
would think of homosexuality as an example of same-sex
sexual behavior. Uh, SO all, all examples of homosexuality,
I would consider same-sex sexual behavior, uh, but not
all same-sex sexual behavior, I would call homosexuality. I
would say that homosexuality implies this sort of, um,
Attraction for the same sex that uh in many
examples in same-sex sexual behavior in animals, and probably
a lot of the examples that we'll talk about,
there isn't that apparent attraction, uh, necessarily, so I,
I wouldn't consider them examples of homosexuality.
Right, um, is same sex sexual behavior and an
evolutionary conundrum, and if so,
how, yeah, so I would say it really isn't
an evolutionary conundrum, although it's often called that and
it can seem like one, and the reason it
can seem like one is essentially that Evolution or,
or I should say natural selection, right, is, is
kind of loosely speaking, trying to, to optimize how
many offspring individuals are producing, trying to maximize that
loosely speaking. And uh of course mating between members
of the same sex are not going to directly
result in offspring production. So the, the kind of
logic behind calling it an evolutionary conundrum is that
individuals are spending energy on. On attempted matings, they're
spending time on attempted matings that are never going
to result in offspring production. So in that sense,
it it seems maladaptive and, and it often is
referred to as a conundrum. The reason I would
say that uh it's maybe a little bit unfair
to call it an evolutionary conundrum, especially today, uh,
maybe I would have felt differently, you know, decades
ago, but there's now been decades of work that
are clarifying why same-sex sexual behavior has evolved and,
um, what some of the different uh evolutionary forces
are that lead to same-sex sexual behavior and in
particular lead to same-sex sexual behavior as being Uh,
uh, uh, part of an adaptive strategy that individuals
are taking when they're attempting reproduction and attempting to
decide, uh, with whom to mate.
OK, so tell us more about that. In what
ways is it or can it be adaptive?
Yeah, so a lot of the work on this
comes from insects, and in a lot of these
cases, essentially what it seems like is happening is
that when individuals are in conditions where Uh, mating
attempts are really mating opportunities are really hard to
come by, you know, maybe you're living in a
very low density conditions, uh, or maybe it's just
that matings aren't very costly, right? Maybe, um, an
attempted mating isn't actually that much energy expenditure. There
isn't much of an opportunity cost, right, to, to
attempted matings. In cases like this, it appears what
happens or or what often is the case is
that there Um, What selection, the, the strategy that
selection has kind of resulted in is, is indiscriminate
mating or imperfect sex discrimination, where individuals Don't spend
the time or the energy to to be very
selective about who they mate with. And as a
byproduct of that strategy, you're getting same-sex sexual behavior,
right? So in in cases where individuals are, are
not very choosy and they're not choosy as an
adaptation due to, like I said, low opportunity costs
um to matings or maybe high opportunity costs to
missing a mating. Under these conditions, you can get
same-sex sexual behavior as as a part of an
adaptive strategy.
And I mean, if same sex sexual behavior is
not the same as homosexuality, then it doesn't necessarily
mean that individuals who practice these kinds of behaviors
are necessarily homosexual or even exclusively homosexual, right? So
they can still have uh sex with uh the
opposite, with members from the opposite sex and appropriate.
Yeah, yeah, and that's a really nice clarification that
I should have said it, it's, that's exactly right.
So in these examples that I'm talking about, what
you're seeing is actually that um that individuals are
Essentially just getting more matings overall, some of those
are with members of the same sex, some of
those are with members of the opposite sex, and,
and there's, I would think of it as a
bit of a trade-off between how choosy you are,
how strongly you attempt to discriminate the sex of
potential mating partners, and how many total matings you
receive, right? And different forces can balance that trade-off
in different ways, resulting in more overall matings and,
and therefore also more matings with the opposite sex.
Right. I, I mean, uh, I haven't prepared any
questions about homosexuality itself, but since I asked you
if same-sex sexual behavior is an evolutionary conundrum, what
about homosexuality itself? Is it an evolutionary conundrum or
not?
No, so I still think the answer is no,
um, and again it's because we sort of understand
the mechanisms, right? So in behind, behind this behavior.
So in the case of, um, homosexuality, which is
really typically studied in humans, uh, we know there's
sort of different, uh, factors, different genetic factors, as
well as some epigenetic factors, so things about gene
regulation that are going to, uh, Have some predictive
power about an individual's sexual preferences. So some of
the classic examples are ideas like uh what's known
as sexually antagonistic selection. So it's the idea that
there is some genes that are beneficial in one
sex, but Um, result in lower fitness, less offspring
production in the other sex. And so, uh, there's
some evidence that, uh, genes controlling, um, sexual preference
are under sexually antagonistic selection. So again, you know,
not a conundrum. We understand sort of the evolutionary
forces at work here and there's tons of examples
of, of sexually antagonistic selection in other types of,
of traits, genes that control other types of traits.
Uh, THERE'S also the idea of over dominance. So,
you know, we have two copies of each gene,
and sometimes you can get these cases where if
you have different versions of the gene, that tends
to be beneficial, but then if you have two
of the same version, that's detrimental. This is another
uh common force that can be at play in
evolution that has been linked to Uh, homosexual behavior
or same sex preferences. Um, SO I wouldn't consider
homosexual behavior an evolutionary conundrum either. I think we,
we understand the forces at play that can result
in its evolution, and those are forces that we
see in a wide variety of traits.
OK. So, uh, moving on to another topic, a
sort of related topic, but still a different one.
What is indiscriminate sexual behavior?
Yeah, so indiscriminate sexual behavior is Essentially engaging or
initiating sexual behavior without first making an attempt to
discern or determine the sex of the potential partner.
Uh, AND how has it evolved then,
yeah, so. I would say, um, I guess a
couple of things about how indiscriminate sexual behavior evolved.
One is that, uh, as a couple of people
have argued in the past really 10 years, it's
likely ancestral. Uh, YOU know, I would think of
indiscriminate sexual behavior as being the initial state for
animals they're sexually reproducing, and what has to evolve
is The fact that you're attempting to discriminate the
sex of potential partners. And um, what this means
is sort of the first, the first animals were
likely broadcast spawners, sessile broadcast spawners, so this means
essentially animals that aren't able to move, and the
way they reproduce is by releasing gametes into the
ocean, and then those gametes mix and results in
the reproduction that way it's not like internal fertilization
like we see in in mammals and and Vertebrates,
most vertebrates, um, So indiscriminate sexual behavior. It was
initially not something that had to evolve. It was
something that was probably like the default state. However,
there's also some evidence that more in more recent
evolutionary time, there's likely been some transitions. Back to
indiscriminate sexual behavior or um some cases where indiscriminate
sexual behavior has re-evolved or at least persisted. And
In those cases, how it evolved is actually quite
similar to to what I was talking about before,
this idea that If matings have a very low
cost, or if there's a very high cost, uh,
a high opportunity cost to missing a mating, then
it probably doesn't pay to attempt to to discriminate
the sex of potential partners. Um, AND I guess
I can give a couple of examples of how
that appears to have played out in nature. Um,
SO there, there is some evidence, uh, certainly from,
uh, common toads, but I suspect it's quite common
among frogs and toads that essentially, uh, males are
mating quite indiscriminately. They're in this pond, they come
across another frog and they attempt amplexus, which is
essentially just the, the kind of mating position of
these frogs and If a male attempts amplexis with
another male, the receiving male will let out a
release call, essentially saying, uh, I'm another male, you
know, you don't want to mate with me, and
that first male will, you know, basically immediately release
and go on looking for other mates, right? So
that whole process is happening very quickly. There's very
low costs to that interaction. So it doesn't. It
doesn't really pay for selection to come up with
a strategy to avoid that because it's just not
a costly behavior in the first place. So this
is one way that that indiscriminate sexual behavior might
be maintained. Another example, um, that is less obviously
indiscriminate but still at least in the same genre
is, is, uh, cases of a a deep sea
squid. I'm not sure it's common name, but there's
this deep sea squid that um, Essentially there there's
been observations of same-sex meetings. I think of it
as sperm packets being deposited on other males. And
in this case, what's been argued is that these
squid living in the deep ocean at very low
density, it's rare that you come across a conspecific.
So if you do come across a conspecific, if
you come across another squid of your species, then
You really can't afford to not mate with that
individual if they're a female, right? That might be
your only chance to uh engage in reproduction to
to produce offspring. So it just doesn't pay to
figure out whether that's a male or a female,
and, and the best strategy is to attempt mating
whenever you come across a con specific. Um, SO
those are some of the, some of the reasons
that it has evolved. I think another reason that
it's evolved that uh could be cases where The
opposite sex just isn't distinguishable, right? So the thing,
you know, as we're talking about sex discrimination and
and attempting to mate with the opposite sex. Something
that's kind of underlying all of that is the
idea that you can figure out what sex potential
partners are, right? And certainly there's probably, probably most
animals that you look at, at least as a
human, right, that's not immediately obvious and, and it
seems like it's also in some cases not immediately
obvious to those organisms themselves. Um, AND there's some
actually really fun examples of this. So in in
Litterina, uh, this, this genus of snails. Uh, MALE,
like too, too much matings, too many, uh, male,
too, too much attention from males, essentially, too many
mating attempts for males can be costly to females.
And in this high density population of Litterina, the
females have evolved to lose sex-specific cues from their
mucus. So in lower density populations in the mucus
of these snails, there's essentially some chemicals that lets
other snails know, hey, I'm a female, and in
this population, the females because they're under so much
male harassment. They've evolved to lose this sex-specific cue.
So now if you're a male snail and you
come across a trail, you don't know if it's
a male or a female, right? You're sort of
constrained to follow that trail and attempt to mate
indiscriminately because the females have essentially hidden or concealed
the identity of, of their sex.
Right. Uh, I mean, do we have any idea
when it comes to the evolutionary history of sexual
behavior, if indiscriminate sexual behavior came first or if
it was discriminate sexual behavior?
So, so. Some people have argued, I think pretty
convincingly, it makes logical sense that indiscriminate sexual behavior
must have come first. So the idea here, like
I said, the first sexually reproducing organisms were these
sessile broadcast ones. So organisms that are or animals,
animals that are kind of sitting still on the
ocean floor and reproducing by releasing gametes into the
ocean, and then those gametes mix and that results
in reproduction. We had to get from that state
to the state of every animal that we see
reproducing today, from humans to insects, those organisms that
have internal fertilization and with examples of of female
targeting of of preferential um copulation attempts with members
of the opposite sex, and the process of getting
from the point of sessile broadcast spawners to Uh,
to all the organisms we see today with internal
fertilization and opposite sex preferences, presumably passed through a
point where we had organisms that were capable of
moving around that could express some more complex sexual
behavior, but had not yet evolved um this strategy
to specifically target members of the opposite sex. We
believe that's the most likely scenario.
Right. And and in what conditions is the indiscriminate
sexual behavior and optimal strategy?
Yeah, so we know uh a few different examples
um of conditions that favor indiscriminate sexual behavior. A
few of them are things that I've already touched
on, right? So if mating is not very costly,
like we saw in that common toad example, then
this is something that's gonna favor indiscriminate sexual behavior.
If you're really rarely encountering members of the opposite
sex. Which is essentially to say if there's a
really high cost to missing a mating, like we
saw in that example of the deep sea squid,
then this is another uh another set of conditions
that's going to favor indiscriminate sexual behavior. Something that
we haven't touched on that's actually been probably the
most extensively studied empirically is the idea of biased
sex ratios. So if you are a male and
Most, and you're in a strongly female biased environment,
so you're one of the only males, then it
might not pay to really worry too much about
sex discrimination because Most, if you mate indiscriminately and
most con specifics are female, then most of your
matings will be with females. So you're kind of,
you know, you're getting preferential female matings for free
essentially. On the other hand, in conditions that are
highly male biased, where if most individuals that you
mate with are going to be males, then those
are conditions that are going to make it. Especially
favorable to uh engage in or to evolve sex
discrimination because that's really what's going to allow you
to start to preferentially mate with females, right? The
costs and benefits of sex discrimination are really tightly
linked to the adult sex ratio. Um, AND interestingly,
so this, this kind of logic of what I
said comes from theory, but interestingly, as far as
I know, there's one study that actually looks at
this empirically that sets up experimental evolution. They watch
evolution in the lab under uh bias sex ratios
in uh red flower beetles, tribolium, and they see
this exact trend that I described where The males
that are reared over many generations at a 9
to 1 male bias sex ratio evolve much stronger
sex discrimination than males that are are reared over
multiple generations at a 1 to 9 female biased
sex ratio.
So would there be any relationship between indiscriminate sexual
behavior and the evolution of same-sex sexual behavior?
Yes, absolutely. So, I would think of same-sex sexual
behavior as being a byproduct of indiscriminate sexual behavior,
right? Indiscriminate sexual behavior is one reason that you
might see same-sex sexual behavior. There's other reasons you
might see same-sex sexual behavior, some of those we
touched on. Um, BUT in cases where individuals are
mating indiscriminately, then necessarily if they encounter a member
of the same sex, they're going to attempt to
mate with them, and you're gonna get same-sex sexual
behavior as a result, right? And this is kind
of the idea that I was talking about earlier
when I said that um same sex sexual behavior
can be a part of a larger adaptive strategy,
right? There's cases like we've just talked about that.
Favor indiscriminate sexual behavior, uh, evolutionarily and in those
cases, as a part of indiscriminate sexual behavior, you're
going to see some same-sex sexual behavior as well.
Mhm. So earlier I asked you if, uh, what
came, what came first discriminate sexual behavior or indiscriminate
sexual behavior, but, uh, does indiscriminate sexual behavior relate
in any way to the evolution of discriminate sexual
behavior?
Yeah, so I guess what I would say to
that is I would sort of think of this
is a big continuum. From completely indiscriminate sexual behavior
to where, uh, whenever an individual is encountering a
con specific, they're attempting to meet, or maybe if
they're even encountering uh members of the opposite sex
or something, or I'm sorry, members of a different
species or uh something that maybe looks like a
con specific, but isn't actually, right? There there's kind
of a lot of flavors of of what could
be indiscriminate sexual behavior. This is all on one
extreme of the continuum. The other extreme of the
continuum would be a case where there is perfect
sex discrimination. Individuals always know and are always correct
about what's a male and what's a female. And
individuals will only attempt to meet once they are
positive that they've identified what's a male and what's
a female. This kind of perfectly discriminate sexual behavior,
this is another extreme of a continuum. At the
same time, there's all of these different examples of
imperfect sex discrimination, right? Maybe individuals are more likely
to mate with members of the opposite sex, but
because there's so much variation between what a male
looks like and what a female looks like, maybe
sometimes, you know, they don't identify males and females
correctly or or selection has shaped. Kind of a
strategy that allows them to be somewhat permissive about
how confident do they need to be about the
sex of a potential mating partner before they attempt
to mate, right? And and this is the idea
of imperfect sex discrimination. I think that imperfect sex
discrimination is probably more common than completely indiscriminate sexual
behavior. The idea that there's some sex discrimination. Um,
BUT there's often going to be cases where, uh,
the, the, what some have referred to as the
mating filter. How confident do you need to be
when you're attempting to mate with a con specific
is broad enough that you're getting, you know, quite
a bit of same-sex mating as a result. Um,
SO really this is, this is kind of the
continuum I would, I would think about and like
we discussed, you, you probably saw conditions that started
on the indiscriminate end of that continuum. But what
we've seen throughout the evolution of animals is uh
species filling essentially every gap on that continuum, right?
There, there is a wide range of different strengths
of sex sex discrimination that we see, um, and
in this way we've kind of gotten the evolution
of sex discrimination from this starting point, presumed starting
point of indiscriminate sexual behavior.
So let me ask you now about mate attachment.
How did mate attachment evolve?
Yeah. So let me start by maybe defining what
we mean by attachment and uh and where and
how we see it and can observe it. So,
I would define attachment as a pair bond strengthening
through time. So a pair bond being, you know,
two individuals that are in a socially monogamous relationship
that that's resulting in offspring production. If How those
individuals. Basically feel about each other is becoming stronger
through time than we could say that they're becoming
attached, right? We're we're sort of anthropomorphizing a little
bit um in doing that, but I think there
is, there's a way to operationalize that which is
essentially how likely are is that monogamous pair to
stay together. So, In behavioral ecology, evolutionary biology, we,
we refer to monogamous pairs splitting up as divorce.
Speaking of anthropomorphizing, um, so if you get the
likelihood of divorce, the sort of propensity for that
pair bond. To split up, reducing the longer the
pair has been together, then we could think of
this as a way to operationalize what we mean
by attachment. So, of course, in kind of human
pair bonds, we can just ask about, you know,
feelings individuals have for each other and infer attachment
based on the answers to those questions. We can't
do that with non-human animals. We're talking about these
internal states that we don't have access to. So
it's a little bit harder to infer it, but,
but we can use evidence, um, such as the
fact that the same hormones are are mediating pair
bonding across taxa, uh, so things like oxytocin, vasopressin,
dopamine, uh, and, and the homologs, the, the kind
of analogs of, um, those hormones in Very divergent
taxes, so things like birds. The fact that these
same hormones appear to Um, appear to control the
process of pair bonding so widely and because these
hormones have been specifically implicated in the formation of
pair bonds and feelings of romantic attachment in humans,
we can use this as kind of uh we
we can think of this as maybe providing hints
that we do see attachment more broadly. So that's
just me setting the stage of what we mean
by attachment because I do want to be a
little bit careful because again we're we're using these
words that are a bit loaded, um, and, and
I think it's important to be careful to, to
be precise about what we mean in cases like
that, um. Then how attachment can evolve is essentially,
or at least one reason and something that we
showed is that it it can prevent maladaptive divorce.
In Uh, kind of in the presence of imperfect
information. So to unpack that a little bit, imagine
that, and there's a lot of evidence that this
is the case, that divorce in birds is following
periods of low reproductive success. So if, if a
pair of birds, uh, has a nest failure and
no offspring are produced, then you're more likely to
see divorce occurring. Likely because individuals are using the
information they received. From that nest failure to infer
that either their mate is low quality, their territory
is low quality, something is Bad about the situation
that they find themselves in. So you can imagine
though that or you can, you know, it's important
to realize that that information coming from low reproductive
success is imperfect, right? Maybe they just got unlucky,
maybe their territory isn't bad, maybe their mate isn't
of low quality. Maybe there's just, you know, some
low random probability that the predator comes and and
takes the nest wherever they are, or Um, maybe
it's just a bad year, right? There is a
drought, something like this, something random stochastic is leading
to low reproductive success. What attachment allows individuals to
do is to not overreact to bad luck, right?
What it allows individuals to do is say, OK,
I've spent 5 breeding seasons with this mate on
this territory, and we've been successful each time. So
now that I have one period of low reproductive
success, rather than using that imperfect information to Infer
potentially incorrectly that my mate is low quality, that
my territory is low quality. I'm gonna kind of
use all of that information. I'm gonna use the
fact that I've been with my mate for 5
years already to say, OK, you know, let's give
this another chance, right? Let, let's let's try again
next breeding season and, and not divorce yet. So
this is the hypothesis that we've put forward for
why attachment might be able to evolve, uh, and
the importance of imperfect information in driving that evolution.
Right. So, tell us a little bit more about
the factors that favor the evolution of mate attachment.
You mentioned there, uh, divorce, for example, but in
your work, I also read about high survival rates,
divorce propensities, probabilities of nest failure. So tell us
a little bit more about that.
Yeah, so the, the theory suggests that there are
3 factors that are really important for the evolution
of, of this type of attachment. The first factor
is survival. So attachment uh is only able to
evolve in relatively long-lived species, species with high survival
rates, low mortality, low adult mortality rates. And there's
2 reasons for this, for where the intuition comes
from, for why high survival is important for attachment.
The first one is that high survival puts individuals
in control over whether or not they're staying with
their mate. And the way to think about this
is that if If mortality is really high. Then
there's a high probability your mate's gonna die, right?
So it doesn't, it doesn't really matter if you
become attached to them or not, because these external
factors might split up your pair anyways, right? You
might have to find a new mate just due
to, just due to your mate dying. So it's
only under cases with high survival that attachment can
really operate to keep pairs together. But the second
reason that high survival is important or or maybe
a second angle to think of that same factor
is that it's going to allow benefits to accrue,
right? If survival is high, then those are the
cases that you're going to get the the most
time with the same partner, and that's going to
be kind of the most favorable conditions to where
You're able to just stick around and not have
to worry about going and finding a different meat.
Yeah, that's why survival is important. Uh, DIVORCE, and
the overall propensity to divorce is another reason or
another factor that's going to be really important for
the evolution of attachment. And again, it's going to
be cases where divorce propensity is high. Individuals are
actually quite likely to get divorced quickly. That's going
to favor attachment. So that's a little counterintuitive maybe
because it feels like it's going in opposite directions.
The intuition for this is essentially that When are
you with the mate but not yet attached to
them? Well, that's early on in your pair. What
if your mates actually low quality? Well, in those
cases, you don't want to get attached to them,
right? In those cases, it's better if you divorce,
if you split up before attachment has a chance
to operate. High divorce propensities are going to allow
that to happen, right? If you're in a bad,
if your mate is low quality, if you're on
a bad territory. Then you want to leave that
pairing quickly so that attachment doesn't occur because attachment
can be maladaptive, right? If you are on a
bad territory, if you do have a low quality
mate, then it's not going to be beneficial. It
will be detrimental to become attached to them. High
divorce propensities will allow, will prevent that maladaptive expression
of attachment. It will allow the pair to split
up before attachment can occur. And the third condition
I would think of as favoring the evolution of
attachment is what I'll call living in a harsh
environment. So these are going to be cases where
whether you're On a good territory or in a
poor territory. Whether you have a high quality meat
or you have a low quality meat. There's a
pretty high chance that sometimes your nest is just
gonna fail because environmental conditions are harsh. There's a
high chance that you just won't get to reproduce.
And there's two reasons, again, from kind of two
different angles that harsh environments are going to favor
the evolution of attachment. So before I go into
those, let me just quickly go back to this
idea that, OK, if you have a low quality
reproductive situation, a low quality mate, a poor territory,
you don't want to get attached. It's in those
conditions that attachment is maladaptive. Whereas if you have
a high quality mate or you're on a good
territory, you do want to get attached, right? Because
in those cases, uh, you're not gonna overreact to
getting unlucky. Essentially what a harsh environment is going
to do is it's going to make it more
likely that attachment is what keeps you in a
good situation and less likely that attachment will erroneously
be expressed in a bad situation, right? So if
you're on a good territory and you've become attached,
but the environment is harsh, you're just gonna get
unlucky a lot. You're gonna have lower reproductive success
due to that bad luck. So it's under those
conditions that attachment really pays off because it's preventing
you from overreacting to the the um unlucky circumstances
that led to that low reproductive success. On the
flip side of that, if Bad, if poor territories,
if low reproductive, low quality reproductive opportunities are really
bad, then it's unlikely that you get lucky early
on, right? It's unlucky that you're in a bad
situation, but you reproduce fine, and you don't realize
you're in a bad situation. So what that means
is that harsh environments, these really bad low quality
territories or low quality mates. ARE going to result
in attachment rarely being expressed in the first place,
and therefore rarely kind of leading to this this
um Uh, maladaptive, keeping you in a bad situation.
Mhm. OK, so I, I want to ask you
about one last topic. Then you mentioned divorce. How
has divorced, divorce evolved and which factors play a
role in it? Yeah,
so divorce clearly related to attachment based on what
we've been talking about, right? Just the idea that
Why does it evolve that even though you have?
Uh, MONOGAMOUS pairs, they sometimes split up. This is
likely to have evolved because It can allow individuals
to leave those bad situations they might find themselves
in, those low quality needs, low quality territories, and
provide them with an opportunity to trade up. So
if you know, you're in this situation where you
have a nest failure, that's providing you with some
imperfect information that maybe your mate is of low
quality or your territory is of low quality, divorce
gives you an opportunity to act on that information
and look at what other types of opportunities are
out there, potentially allowing you to find a higher
quality mate or a higher quality territory. Um, THERE'S
again kind of three factors that I would think
of as being really important that shape the evolution
of divorce. Uh, SO, and, and again, I'll kind
of say it in the way that, uh, which
factors favor the evolution of high divorce propensities. So
being really quick to leave a partner given nest
failure, but of course the flip side is just
gonna favor low divorce propensities so this high mate
fidelity and these really strong monogamous pairs that stay
together. No, so the first thing that's going to
favor the evolution of high divorce propensities is uh
a large amount of environmental heterogeneity. So when you
have both a strong mixture of high quality and
low quality reproductive opportunities, this is going to favor.
High divorce propensities, and when the difference between how
good a good quality territory is and how bad
a low quality territory is, that's also going to
favor the evolution of high divorce propensities. And basically
the reason for this, the intuition behind this is
that high environmental heterogeneity. Is going to both make
it easier for some correlation to form between individuals
that divorce a lot and high quality territories. And
it's also going to mean that that correlation that
forms is going to have a bigger effect in
terms of how many offspring are produced, because the
good quality territories are so much better than the
poor quality territories. The second factor that's going to
favor the evolution of divorce is basically how important
it is to know your partner. So there's evidence
in a lot of birds, and I, I suspect
it makes intuitive sense to people with kids that
uh having the same partner for longer is beneficial
for coordinating care for offspring. So, uh, a pair
of birds that have been together for 5 years
seem to be essentially better parents together than a
pair in their first year. And If that benefit
is big, then you probably don't want to get
divorced very often, right? If that benefit is big,
then every time you have to find a new
partner, you're kind of resetting, and you need to
re-establish how to coordinate offspring care together. So when
that benefit is relatively small, when it doesn't matter
how experienced you are with your partner, for how
good you are at caring for offspring, that's going
to favor the evolution of higher divorce propensities. And
the last factor and kind of the, the hardest
one I think to wrap your head around is,
uh, how, what is the survival rate, the adult
survival rate. So intermediate survival rates are going to
favor the evolution of the highest divorce propensities. And
this is coming from a trade-off of two different
effects. High survival is going to be good for
uh a lot of divorce. Because it's, it's putting
individuals in control of their situation. The exact same
thing we talked about with attachment. If survival rates
are high, then it's the individuals themselves that are
deciding, am I staying with this partner or am
I leaving this partner. It allows for the trait
that we're talking about divorce, to actually be expressed
rather than to have high adult mortality splitting up
pairs and forcing you to find a new pair
regardless of what you want. This is why high
survival is kind of good for high divorce propensities.
Um, BUT there's a reason that low survival is
good as well, which is that you need. To
have something to trade up into, right? If the
only opportunities that are available that are left available
are low quality. If those only if you divorce
and all you have to choose from are low
quality mates. And low quality territories, then you probably
don't want to get divorced. And mortality, the death
of adults, low survival rates are going to free
up good territories, right? Because those are kind of
blind to whether that territory is of high quality
or of low quality, or if that mate, especially
if that mate is of high quality of low
quality, that that might have no influence over whether
or not you survive. So it's in those cases
with low survival rates that Those good reproductive opportunities
are getting freed up, and when you divorce, you
actually have an opportunity to find something better. So
because of those two conflicting effects, that reason that
high survival is good um for divorce propensities and
that low survival is good for divorce propensities, you
get this sort of hump shape where it's an
intermediate survival rates that you actually get the highest
divorce propensities due to the balancing of those two
opposing effects.
OK, so would you like to tell us what
you're going to be working on in the near
future? Do you, do you already have any ideas
or?
Yeah, so I, I guess sort of the, the
place that I'm planning on moving and have a,
a proposal funded to work on in the next
few years is uh something fairly different from the
stuff that we've been talking about still in the
same general realm, but Instead looking at uh the
role of, of cooperative behavior and group living and
understanding essentially how social networks, so how the set
of connections that you make with your group mates
and the the individual differentiation in those connections has
effects on Kind of population level processes like patterns
of population growth, uh, or evolutionary trajectories that are
occurring in these populations that are socially structured. Uh,
SO, you know, so much work on social networks
just focuses on a single social group and kind
of treats that one network and that one social
group is the whole universe. Um, AND I think
there's a lot of really exciting. Uh, EXCITING examples
and exciting opportunities to extend that to kind of
a higher level view where, you know, you have
populations, uh, like you'd see many primates where you
can kind of think of each group as having
their own social network, and those different groups are
not going to interact prosocially but they might interact
competitively and understanding how The network structure interacts with
those between group interactions and shapes those population level
processes, I think is a really exciting frontier for
understanding social behavior, uh exciting frontier for behavioral ecology,
and something I'm kind of planning on focusing on
for the next uh few years.
Great, so are there any places on the internet
where people can follow your work?
Yeah, so, um, I have a, um, Twitter account
and a blue sky account, um, at Lurch Eco
Evo, um, and also, um, you know, I, I
think if you Google me, you can come across
a website, my website, and, and that will also
allow you to, to keep up on, on papers
and other news as it comes out.
Great, so Ryan, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, thank you for having me. I had a
lot of fun with the conversation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Dayani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Per Crolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.